okay great
um what I what I'd like to do uh this
morning is uh give you an overview of um
some aspects of cancer in general and
then more specifically brain cancer and
show how we are able to uh manipulate
energy metabolism in the in the body uh
and in the brain uh to Target U uh
cancers as I said I I I we can work on
any kind of a tumor but uh I'll
specifically be speaking about brain
tumors uh
today um first uh I put here a
provocative question for those of you
who are in the cancer field uh you will
know that the National Cancer Institute
uh on their website has put 24
provocative questions these questions
are thought to um uh direct uh cancer
research for the remain for the
throughout this century and um uh
stimulate various kinds of approaches
and new insights into the disease
however you will not see this
provocative question on the 24 question
list mainly because uh most people in
the cancer field um have have already uh
determined that cancer is a genetic
disease um the question is is uh uh is
that is that true or
not now uh what what I have done is uh
reviewed over 50 years of research from
a variety of perspectives uh on the
nature of uh the role of of of the
nucleus in the mitochondria in the in in
the progression of and origin of this
disease now this these studies I I put I
put this very simple diagram to distill
down uh quite a number of Articles uh uh
that go back to the
1940s um all the way up to present day
uh um uh investigations and U basically
uh uh I don't know if you can see this
this might I know we had oh maybe here's
another one here um let's see if this oh
there it is okay so what I've done here
is I've shown here's a a normal cell uh
in green a tumor cell in red uh what
I've shown is a normal nucleus and
Christi in the
mitochondria um and we know normal cells
beget normal cells and when we look at
the Cancer cell in red we have a
dysmorphic nucleus and we have
mitochondria that have absent cristate
to signal to indicate that we have
defects in both the nucleus and and
mitochondria in the cancer cell and
cancer cells beget cancer cells there
been a number of studies where uh nuclei
have been transferred these are an
animal and human tumors uh nuclei can be
transferred from one cell to another and
when the nucleus of the cancer cell is
trans transferred to the cytoplasm of
either an oite or a very early stem cell
uh what you get are are normal cells
sometimes normal tissues and sometimes
complete organisms from the nucleus of a
cancer
cell now what happens depending on the
number of mutations will determine how
far in development that organism goes
before it aborts so the mutations that
are associated with cancer don't cause
cancer they abort development now if you
take the nucleus from the normal cell
and put it into the cytoplasm of a
cancer cell you either get dead cells or
tumor cells you don't get normal cells
what what these findings indicate is
that is that it's uh uh uh the
mitochondria can suppress tumorogenesis
and that and that uh mutations uh
whatever they happen to be or how
they're related are not the drivers of
this disease regardless of what you
might
read now if cancer is not a genetic
disease what kind of a disease is it and
OV warberg many years ago he did the
most of the work we've heard some
preliminary speakers about this all
cancer arises from damage to cellular
respiration glucose fermentation
gradually compensates compensates for
inefficient
respiration uh respiratory damage
eventually becomes irreversible and
cancer cells continue to ferment uh and
he was primarily talking about glucose
we have expanded this now to include
glutamine fermentation tumor cells can
ferment not only carbohydrates but they
can also ferment some amino acids in
particular glutamine so this is another
I'm not going to have chance to talk
about that but if we don't Target
glutamine we won't get a complete
management of the disease although
targeting glucose will certainly be very
effective now we know that at metabolism
um most of the energy coming from the
cells uh will be coming through
oxidative phosphorilation we get small
amounts of energy through glucose
fermentation and we can also get energy
through the kreb cycle cancer cells have
damaged to oxidative phosphorilation
thereby having having to need
compensatory energy source through
fermentation glucose fermentation goes
way up in many cancers and also
glutamine fermentation can go up so
these two sources of energy can
compensate for the loss of
oxphos so when we look at mitochondria
of tumor cells this is a normal electron
micrograph you can see the chiste load
the christe contain the proteins of the
electron transport chain which are which
generate most of the energy in our
bodies but uh you can see here this is a
mitochondria of a gleo blastoma multi
formia brain tumor you can see it's
chryssis there's many examples I've gone
through in my book many many uh we never
find completely normal mitochondria in
any tumor cell and there's no way that
these tumor cells are going to be able
to produce energy through oxas if they
don't have the structures needed to do
this now what I've done here is just
summarized the entire cancer field in
the simple diagram that my students and
I uh we we worked on this for about five
years you can get the students will so
that they can help us build this whole
thing uh cancer is a metabolic
mitochondrial disease caused by multiple
different things in the environment
damaging respiration this then leads to
a retrograde signaling system
mitochondria signal to the nucleus we we
we don't have enough energy the nucleus
then turns on enogen the enogen are
compensatory they're transcription
factors that drive fermentations both
glucose and glutamine fermentations but
if the cells continue to ferment the
nucleus becomes unstable so you get
genome instability as a secondary
Downstream epiphenomena of damage to
respiration so oxphos is gradually
replaced by substrate level
phosphorilation unfortunately I won't
have a chance to talk about Advanced
cancers which are basically a macras
disease macras has used tremendous
amounts of glutamine and glucose so you
really have to Target to manage
metastatic Advanced caner you have to
Target both metabolites anyway you can
get the entire spectrum of the Hanahan
Weinberg characteristics following this
I like to talk now a little bit about
brain cancer in specific Al a highly
these are highly invasive and
vascularized tumors generally poor
prognosis incidents may be increasing
through cell phone use but this is only
for those individuals that might be
suable to this Mo unfortunately most
therapies for brain cancer are
ineffective in managing the disease two
major categories we have the primary and
the secondary brain tumors gasta is a
primary brain tumor one of the worst
very low PR very poor survival after 5
years this is a childhood cerebella
tumor meul blastoma about 22 and a half%
22.5% of all cancer deaths uh come from
metastasis that is the movement of
cancer cells from some other organ to
the
brain now we have used calorie
restriction restricted ketogenic diets
and these kinds of uh approaches as a
metabolic approach to cancer management
now calorie restriction involves a total
dietary restriction it differs from
starvation in that calorie restriction
can maintain adequate levels of minerals
and nutrients calorie restriction
uh if it done the right way and in the
and looking at the correct biomarkers
will enhance mitochondrial biogenesis
and increase uh efficiency of oxidative
phosphorilation it's important to
recognize that calorie restriction in
the mouse mimics therapeutic water only
fasting in humans so everything you see
about all the stuff that I'll talk about
calorie restriction how do humans do
that you have to stop eating do
therapeutic fast so this is because the
basil metabolic rate of the mouse is
seven times that of the human
so the biomarkers for calorie
restriction are reduced blood glucose
and elevated Ketone bodies let me this
almost hit the wrong so we know the
brain uses glucose exclusively however
through an evolutionary conserved
adaptation to low glucose we mobilize
fats this is again related to hormone
changes insulin and glucagon and things
like this and the three major Ketone
bodies are beta hydroxy berate
acetoacetate acetone is a non-tic
degradation product of acetoacetate so
so the brain will then transition
gradually over to Ketone use as an
alternative to glucose to subserve
energy needs for that organ other organs
will use ketones as well and fatty
acids when we look at the energy
problems in brain cancer in fact most
cancers for that matter well we have
well in in the brain specifically
glucose is the primary fuel it enters
through Transporters goes into the it
goes through the mden meoff pathway to
pyruvate pyruvate in normal cells would
be fully oxidized in the TCA cycle
because all the mitochondrial problem s
in brain tumors and other tumors
pyruvate then is is is fermented to
lactate lactate goes back into the
circulation goes to the liver be
converted back to glucose through the
Corey cycle it comes back this is this
vicious cycle we just heard about and
some other components of that calorie
restriction will lower blood glucose
levels naturally you can bring those
blood sugars down carbohydrates or
Ketone bodies will then enter into the
brain and then uh the problem is is the
cancer cells we and others have shown
that the tumor cells cannot metabolize
the Ketone bodies for energy so what
happens then is they be their main
source of fuel glucose not only that the
normal cells up regulate glucose
Transporters putting additional
metabolic pressure on these cancer cells
they can't use the fuel that the normal
cells are using they become
metabolically
marginalized now to show you uh we've
done a lot of work in mice uh on on
calorie restriction this showed ad
libitum Al is an unrestricted Mouse fed
adlibitum this is a 40% calorie
restriction over about 12 days starting
3 days after tumor implantation you can
clearly see we can get reductions
anywhere from 65 to 90% reduction
depending upon uh how we do this the
important thing is what are the what are
the what's going on inside the tumor
cells what what's we've shown that this
is powerfully anti-angiogenic blood
vessels are significantly reduced in
these tumors you know you hear about all
the antigenic therapies there's nothing
more powerful than calor restriction of
reducing the vascularization of the
tumor it's also proapototic it kills the
tumor cells through uh program cell
death mechanisms and we've shown uh
We've shown that so you can see the
tunnel positive these are the dead cells
uh uh in ad libitum fed cancer you don't
see as many as you do in the calorie
restricted tumors we've done linear
regression analysis to ask you know what
is the what are the drivers for this
whole thing and glucose as glucose
levels go down each one of these is a as
a mouse under a different dietary
condition ketones go up this is an
evolutionary conserved adaptation as
glucose down tumor glute goes down tumor
weight goes down the size of the tumors
shrink for the reasons that I've said
we've also seen a correlation between
glucose and igf-1 Insulin like growth
factor one which is a driver of tumor
angiogenesis as glucose goes down igf-1
goes down and the corresponding
signaling Cascades associated with that
hormone go down uh we've just recently
shown how calorie restriction can Target
the most problematic aspect of Cancer's
inflammation which is NF Capa B uh
calorie restriction knocks down
phosphorated NF Capa B through Cox
mechanisms it shuts down the entire
inflammatory system that's going on
that's driving and contributing to the
progression of the
disease so can calories now the other
thing is as well in cancer especially
brain cancer have these terribly
invasive tumor cells they don't just
grow as a lump in the brain they
actually spread through the brain we
we've developed a natural Mouse model uh
uh for human gleo blastoma multiform and
we're able to test a a number of
therapies on this new mouse model that
we developed it's one of the only mice
models Mouse models that reflect the
entire spectrum of what you see in the
human disease and this shows you here
this is the tumor growing in an ad
libidum fed Mouse here's the hippocampus
these tumor cells will will invade right
through the entire brain they'll move
from one hemisphere to the other
Hemisphere and you can quantitate that
using bi bioluminescent Imaging as we've
done but you can see in the calorie
restricted guys that the the the the
borders of the tumor become much sharper
they they don't invade as much and we've
shown how you can they reduce invasion
significantly the calorie restricted
diet which is linked to low glucose and
elevated
ketones another question is does can we
get therapeutic Synergy when we combine
a glycolysis inhibitor uh together with
a restricted ketogenic diet we've heard
already about ketogenic diets um the
diets it doesn't in this case we're
looking at a standard Mouse Chow diet
which is actually like a standard
American diet high in carbs low in fat
and you've seen the whole thing here uh
any kind kind of a ketogenic diet will
work we've looked at various this is a
keto Cal but we've looked at lard base
we've looked at other base diets this is
a low carbohydrate high fat moderate
protein de produces a fatto protein carb
ratio of 4 to1 as opposed to less than
one for the high carb diet uh 2di oxy
glucose is a non-metabolizable analog of
glucose so what what happens is a
substitution here for hydrogen for a
hydroxy group this molecule enters into
the cells in fact it's like flu deoxy
glucose can go into the cells but it can
not be used for metabolism through gly
glycogen to make glycogen or through
glycolysis so it kind of uh inhibits the
the energy metabolism so we've done a
preliminary study in mice um showing now
this is a standard diet high carb diet
unrestricted a body weight control and
then we gave the animals two deoxy
glucose at a dosage that had no
therapeutic benefit I wanted to use a
dose that you could say well he's
they've got two deoxy glucose but it's
not having any effect and the body
weights were the same now we we give the
ketogenic diet in restricted amounts
because we've shown if you don't
restrict the ketogenic diet it has no
therapeutic benefit so we calorie
restrict the ketogenic diet to lower
blood sugars and Elevate ketones even
further and then we added the 2 deoxy
glucose and now we got powerful Synergy
between a diet and and and the and the
drug and and basically what happens here
is under the FED State you have a lot of
glucose molecules going around glucose
is the sole fuel for the nor for the
tumor cells which will drve their
progression also normal cells will use
the glucose however when you go into the
restricted diet glucose levels go down
and ketones go up the normal cells now
uh uh take in the ketones which the the
tumor cells can't use the ketones not
only that receptors for glucose actually
go up in the normal cells putting
additional metabolic pressure on the
tumor cells you throw in a little 2
deoxy glucose which now will more
specifically Target the tumor cells to
give you a synergistic interaction
between the ketogen diet restricted and
drugs this is an emerging field we've
just started this there are many other
metabolites out there that we can use
together with these diets to kill off
these tumor cells and and also targeting
their glut glutamine metabolism which I
w't have time to talk about so the
clinical question can the ketogenic diet
um be used to uh manage brain cancer in
humans you you can do all I'm I'm
finished doing the Mouse stuff forget it
we just we you know there's a hundred
studies out there on mice and cancer
forget it we got to go to patients now
we have proved this is works in the
mouse and it will work in humans and and
we already heard from the first study
Lyndon nebling study back case Weston
Reserve uh with a with a diet that
lowered glucose and elevated Ketone she
was able to get um uh longer term
management for two children with uh
inoperable brain tumor we published the
second paper uh on a patient uh from
Italy uh using uh therapeutic fasting
ketogenic diets together unfortunately
with the standard of care you can't get
away from it it's a Terri terrible thing
it's responsible for the demise and most
of the can brain cancer patients are
dying from the standard of
care now this patient uh had classic
histological evidence for gly blastoma
High cell density palisading cells um
the radio this is the radiographic image
before any treatment uh you can see
multicentric this is an MRI image gleo
blastoma we confirm that histologically
the patient did receive the standard of
care following the standard of care the
patient then uh was on a therapeutic
fast for 3 Days uh then on a calorie
restricted ketogenic diet for several
months now we had radiological
resolution which very rarely happens
when using just radiation and chemo
teide so we had a a a really quite
remarkable response we had two more MRIs
both look clean the patient then gets
off the ketogenic diet about two months
later uh tumor recurrence rather than
going back on the diet the patient chose
to go on a vastin uh which we now know
enhances the invasive properties of the
tumor cells terrible drug never never
recommended anyway it it selects for the
most invasive cells and unfortunately
the patient expired the the issue here
of course is that will this therapy work
and the answer is uh this proves the
cons yes we can we can we can greatly
improve this as long as we can get
glucose elevations and ketones uh Ketone
elevation you can get uh uh uh put the
tumor in a defensive State and then once
it's in this defensive State we then go
after the tumor with specific drugs to
put additional pressure uh on the um uh
on the cells so we have pre-clinical and
case report studies indicate that this
restricted ketogenic diet Can Be an
Effective metabolic therapy for managing
malignant brain cancer in children and
adults and the therapeutic effects of
the diet against brain cancer can be
enhanced when we combine it with
specific non-toxic drugs that work
together with the diet to Target the
surviving tumor cells
now uh I put all this out in a recent
book it just came out from Wy press
discusses this and many other
therapeutic non-toxic therapeutic
options for managing cancer not just
brain cancer and I thank my
collaborators that have worked with me
on this and many of my students in my
cancer class have that have been very U
helpful on this thank you for your
attention
because um because I'm running this I'm
I'm GNA ask the only question uh are you
currently taking
patients um I'm not a physician so uh
what I've done is I I collaborate with
Physicians and we're trying to get a
pilot trial going at the University of
Pittsburgh our biggest problem is uh uh
IRB institutional review review boards
uh they they just put so many pressures
I mean this is not a toxic therapy yet
they they treat it as if oh my God all
these patients are going to get sick uh
um we're trying to get a pilot study
there's another pilot study at at
Michigan State University I I wrote the
protocols for both of these of both of
these uh approaches it's just very hard
to get through irbs the institutional
review board once that happens I think
there'll be a lot more uh a lot more use
for
this well all right we'll take you um
this is more of a clarification but um
you talked about standard of care being
the main cause for demise of cancer
patients can you just um say what that
is that includes yes um standard of care
for brain cancer involves radiation and
Timo olomide okay as soon as you
irradiate the brain you you damage you
release a lot of inflammatory cyto
kindes you allow glutamate to go into
the micro environment the glutamate is
then taken up by G cells and converted
to glutamine because the neurons have
been killed the glutamine now goes into
the tumor cells and is fermented along
with the tumor cells to reduce the
inflammation they give St steroids
steroids make your blood sugar go up to
the level of a diabetic so what you have
now is you have powerful glucose and you
have powerful glutamine and together
they will fuel the tumor this is the
demise of the cancer patient the reason
why we have so few people surviving is
because of the standard of care it has
to be changed if it's not changed there
will be no major problem Thank you
period thank
[Applause]
you